1
RobustSleepNet: Transfer learning for automated
sleep staging at scale
Antoine Guillot and Valentin Thorey
Abstract—Sleep disorder diagnosis relies on the analysis of
polysomnography (PSG) records. As a preliminary step of this
examination, sleep stages are systematically determined. In prac-
tice, sleep stage classiﬁcation relies on the visual inspection of 30-
second epochs of polysomnography signals. Numerous automatic
approaches have been developed to replace this tedious and
expensive task. Although these methods demonstrated better
performance than human sleep experts on speciﬁc datasets, they
remain largely unused in sleep clinics. The main reason is that
each sleep clinic uses a speciﬁc PSG montage that most automatic
approaches cannot handle out-of-the-box. Moreover, even when
the PSG montage is compatible, publications have shown that
automatic approaches perform poorly on unseen data with
different demographics. To address these issues, we introduce
RobustSleepNet, a deep learning model for automatic sleep stage
classiﬁcation able to handle arbitrary PSG montages. We trained
and evaluated this model in a leave-one-out-dataset fashion on a
large corpus of 8 heterogeneous sleep staging datasets to make
it robust to demographic changes. When evaluated on an unseen
dataset, RobustSleepNet reaches 97% of the F1 of a model
explicitly trained on this dataset. Hence, RobustSleepNet unlocks
the possibility to perform high-quality out-of-the-box automatic
sleep staging with any clinical setup. We further show that
ﬁnetuning RobustSleepNet, using a part of the unseen dataset,
increases the F1 by 2% when compared to a model trained
speciﬁcally for this dataset. Therefore, ﬁnetuning might be used
to reach a state-of-the-art level of performance on a speciﬁc
population.
Index Terms—Automated Sleep Stage classiﬁcation, Deep
Learning, Transfer Learning, EEG, PSG
I. INTRODUCTION
During sleep, the body alternates through different phys-
iological states called sleep stages. The AASM (American
Academy of Sleep Medicine) guidelines deﬁne ﬁve different
sleep stages: wake, NREM1, NREM2, NREM3 (or deep
sleep), and REM (rapid eye movement) [1]. Sleep stage classi-
ﬁcation is a primary tool used systematically in the diagnosis
of sleep disorders such as narcolepsy [2] or sleep apnea [3].
Sleep stages are determined with the use of a polysomnogra-
phy (PSG) device. It can monitor several physiological signals
throughout the night, but the ones typically recorded are
brain activity (electroencephalography [EEG]), muscle activity
(electromyography [EMG]), eye movements (electrooculog-
raphy [EOG]), cardiac activity (electrocardiography [ECG]),
and breathing. In a clinical setup, sleep stage classiﬁcation is
generally done manually by a trained sleep expert who visually
analyses the recorded signals. The analysis is conducted on
30-seconds epochs, where each epoch is associated with one
A. Guillot and V. Thorey are with the Algorithm Team, Dreem, Paris
of the ﬁve sleep stages according to the standards deﬁned by
the AASM. The manual classiﬁcation is quite expensive, as
it takes up to an hour to score a whole recording (which
is around 1000 epochs or 8-hours long). The sleep scoring
guidelines do not fully reﬂect the variability of patterns that
exist among subjects. As a consequence, different scorers can
interpret the same epoch differently. An analysis of nights
scored by more than 2,500 scorers shows an average inter-
rater agreement of 82.6% across sleep stages [4], the inter-
rater agreement strongly depends on the dataset demographics
and on the sleep center where the study is recorded. As a
rule of thumb, a dataset with older subjects or subjects with
sleep disorders presents lower inter-rater agreements [5] than
a dataset composed of healthy subjects [6].
The high cost and relatively important bias in manual
sleep staging have raised an interest in developing automatic
sleep staging systems. Recently, deep learning has successfully
reached human-performances in automatic sleep staging, in a
supervised learning context [7] [8] [5] [2] [9] [10]; despite
this, automated sleep staging methods remain unused in most
sleep clinics. We identiﬁed two important factors to explain
why sleep clinics still rely on manual sleep staging. We will
refer to these using the terms ”input-shape incompatibility”
and ”accuracy-drop issue.”
The input-shape incompatibility issue is practical. Each
sleep clinic has a speciﬁc PSG montage that can differ
according to the device used, the particularity of the targeted
population, or speciﬁc requirements from a study. Automatic
approaches can handle only a speciﬁc input shape
they are
trained on a speciﬁc dataset with a speciﬁc montage a different
PSG montage will likely generate an incompatible input shape
and thus the impossibility to compute an output for the model.
Conversely, the accuracy-drop issue occurs when a PSG
montage is compatible between two datasets. In that case, a
model trained