 
 
2025 International Conference on Intelligent Computing 
July 26-29, Ningbo, China 
https://www.ic-icc.cn/2025/index.php 
 
MHASSNet: A Deep Neural Network-based Automatic 
Sleep Staging Model Using Hybrid Attention Mechanism 
and State Space Model 
Zhentao Huang1, Shanwen Zhang3 and Yin Tian1,2[✉] 
1 School of Computer Science and Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China 
2 School of Life and Health Information Science and Engineering, Chongqing University of 
Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing 400065, China 
3 Xi’an Key Laboratory of High Precision Industrial Intelligent Vision Measurement Technol-
ogy, School of Electronic Information, Xijing University, Xi’an 710123, China 
✉Corresponding author:tianyin@cqupt.edu.cn 
Abstract. Automatic classification of sleep stages is an important method for 
assessing sleep quality. This paper introduces a sleep staging network 
(MHASSNet) that combines multi-scale convolution, hybrid attention mecha-
nism, and state-space model, aiming to improve the accuracy of sleep stage clas-
sification for more effective evaluation of sleep quality. The model is character-
ized by its hybrid attention mechanism and multi-modal signal processing capa-
bilities. First, MHASSNet uses a multi-scale convolutional neural network 
(MSCNN) to extract low-frequency and high-frequency features. Next, it em-
ploys a hybrid attention module (MAM) that integrates spatial and channel atten-
tion mechanisms to capture the significant spatiotemporal dependencies between 
these features. Additionally, the state-space model (SSM) is used to enhance the 
understanding of temporal contextual information. Experimental results show 
that when tested on two public datasets, MHASSNet achieves significant results 
across various evaluation metrics, demonstrating its superior performance and 
application potential in automatic sleep stage classification. 
Keywords: Sleep Stage, Multi Scale Convolution, Attention Mechanism 
1 
Introduction 
Sleep accounts for about one-third of a person's life and plays a crucial role in main-
taining overall human health. With the acceleration of modern life rhythms and changes 
in lifestyle, various sleep disorders have become significant medical and public health 
issues, receiving increasing attention [1]. Sleep disorders can severely affect an indi-
vidual's cognitive abilities, attention span, and mental state. Chronic sleep disturbances 
can even lead to hypertension, coronary artery disease, and other cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular diseases [2]. Therefore, identifying and addressing patients' sleep dis-
orders to improve sleep quality and ensure overall physical and mental health is critical. 
 
Currently, sleep monitoring, sleep structure analysis, and sleep quality assessment have 
become research hotspots, particularly sleep staging, which is essential for evaluating 
sleep structure and diagnosing sleep-related disorders.In the field of sleep medicine, 
polysomnography (PSG) monitors are the 'gold standard' for diagnosing sleep disorders 
[3]. Polysomnography (PSG) is an important tool used to record various physiological 
signals, including electroencephalogram (EEG), electrooculogram (EOG), electromy-
ogram (EMG), and electrocardiogram (ECG), playing a key role in sleep research [4-
5]. In traditional methods, sleep specialists or doctors first segment the PSG data col-
lected overnight into 30-second non-overlapping segments, and then manually analyze 
these segments according to authoritative standards (such as the Rechtschaffen and 
Kales standards (R&K) [6] or the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) 
standards [7]), categorizing them into different sleep stages. According to the AASM 
standards, sleep stages are typically divided into five categories: Wake (W), Non-Rapid 
Eye Movement 1 (N1), Non-Rapid Eye Movement 2 (N2), Non-Rapid Eye Movement 
3 (N3), and Rapid Eye Movement Sleep (REM). Sleep specialists typically use these 
standards to manually classify the sleep stages, which is not only a labor-intensive pro-
cess but also prone to subjective bias [8]. Therefore, automatic sleep staging is a more 
effective alternative to manual methods, with greater clinical value [9]. 
Simple deep learning networks cannot capture the time-varying features and time 
series information in sleep signals. To overcome these limitations, Supratak et al. [10] 
proposed a deep learning model, DeepSleepNet, which uses convolutional neural net-
works to extract time-invariant features and utilizes bidirectional long short-term 
memory to automatically learn the transition rules between sleep stages from EEG 
epochs. However, it primarily employs a one-to-one input-output model, aiming to la-
bel a single target sleep epoch at a time, but neglects the transition rules between dif-
ferent sleep stages. To address this issue, Phan et al. [11] proposed the SeqSleepNet 
hierarchical recurrent neural network,