1008
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILITATION ENGINEERING, VOL. 31, 2023
A Temporal-Spectral Fused and Attention-Based
Deep Model for Automatic Sleep Staging
Guidan Fu , Yueying Zhou , Peiliang Gong , Pengpai Wang , Wei Shao,
and Daoqiang Zhang , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract— Sleep staging is a vital process for evaluating
sleep quality and diagnosing sleep-related diseases. Most
of the existing automatic sleep staging methods focus on
time-domain information and often ignore the transforma-
tion relationship between sleep stages. To deal with the
above problems, we propose a Temporal-Spectral fused
and Attention-based deep neural Network model (TSA-Net)
for automatic sleep staging, using a single-channel elec-
troencephalogram (EEG) signal. The TSA-Net is composed
of a two-stream feature extractor, feature context learning,
and conditional random field (CRF). Specifically, the two-
stream feature extractor module can automatically extract
and fuse EEG features from time and frequency domains,
considering that both temporal and spectral features can
provide abundant distinguishing information for sleep stag-
ing. Subsequently, the feature context learning module
learns the dependencies between features using the multi-
head self-attention mechanism and outputs a preliminary
sleep stage. Finally, the CRF module further applies transi-
tion rules to improve classification performance. We eval-
uate our model on two public datasets, Sleep-EDF-20 and
Sleep-EDF-78. In terms of accuracy, the TSA-Net achieves
86.64% and 82.21% on the Fpz-Cz channel, respectively.
The experimental results illustrate that our TSA-Net can
optimize the performance of sleep staging and achieve
better staging performance than state-of-the-art methods.
Index Terms— Sleep staging, EEG, feature fusion, multi-
head attention, conditional random field.
I. INTRODUCTION
G
OOD sleep is a crucial human physiological activity
intimately related to health. Studies have shown that
sleep is inextricably linked to human metabolism [1], immune
Manuscript received 5 August 2022; revised 12 December 2022;
accepted 16 January 2023. Date of publication 23 January 2023; date of
current version 3 February 2023. This work was supported in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62136004,
Grant 61876082, and Grant 61732006; in part by the Research Fund
for International Young Scientists under NSFC Grant 62050410348;
and in part by the National Key Research and Development Program
of China under Grant 2018YFC2001600 and Grant 2018YFC2001602.
(Guidan Fu and Yueying Zhou are co-first authors.) (Corresponding
author: Daoqiang Zhang.)
The authors are with the MIIT Key Laboratory of Pattern Analysis
and
Machine
Intelligence,
College
of
Computer
Science
and
Technology,
Nanjing
University
of
Aeronautics
and
Astronautics,
Nanjing 211106, China (e-mail: fuguidan@nuaa.edu.cn; zhouyueying@
nuaa.edu.cn;
plgong@nuaa.edu.cn;
pengpaiwang@nuaa.edu.cn;
shaowei20022005@nuaa.edu.cn; dqzhang@nuaa.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3238852
system [2], and memory [3]. Narcolepsy, sleep apnea syn-
drome, and insomnia are a few examples of sleep-related prob-
lems [4]. With the rapid development of modern civilization,
people are having trouble in sleeping and are increasingly
concerned about the quantity and quality of their sleep.
Sleep staging is essential to evaluating the quality of sleep.
Typically, sleep specialists use acquisition equipment for sleep
staging based on the entire night polysomnogram (PSG) [5]
of the patient, which usually includes electroencephalogram
(EEG), electromyogram (EMG), electrooculogram (EOG), and
electrocardiogram (ECG). The manual sleep staging methods
generally divide the PSG into 30-second segments (called
epochs), and then the segments are manually classified by
specialists based on relevant criteria. The existing criteria for
evaluating the sleep stage include the American Academy of
Sleep Medicine standard (AASM) [6], and the Rechtschaffe
and Kales (R&K) rule [7]. The R&K rule divides the sleep
process into six stages, including wake stage (W), rapid sleep
eye movement stage (REM), S1, S2, S3, and S4 of non-
rapid eye movement stage. The AASM rule combines S3
and S4 into N3, including W, REM, N1, N2, and N3 of
non-rapid eye movement stage. According to the above rules,
sleep specialists categorize the stages of sleep based on the
distinctive waveforms and frequency characteristics that each
stage of sleep exhibits. For instance, K-complex wave and
sleep spindles wave are evident in the N2 stage, and the δ wave
is more prevalent in the N3 stage of deep sleep. Similarly, the
α wave is prominent during the W stage.
Generally, manual labeling and diagnosis in sleep stag-
ing need skilled and experienced specialists, which is time-
consuming and laborious. Even if some specialists have
received training, there are still certain biases in the manual
sleep staging procedure. Besides, various specialists may have
varying views on how the same PSG data should be evaluated.
Considering these factors, it is important to construct objective
and automatic sleep staging methods.
In recent years, some automatic sleep staging techniques
have gained popularity with the growth of machine learning.
Traditional machine learning of sleep staging requires hand-
crafted feature extraction and classifier selection. Firstly, the
data are preprocessed and filtered to obtain clean and non-
impurity signals, then feature extraction is carried out on the
preprocessed signals, and valuable features are selected and
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
FU et al.: TEMPORAL-SPECTRAL FUSED AND ATTENTION-BASED DEEP MODEL FOR AUTOMATIC SLEEP STAGING
1009
input into the classifier to execute sleep staging. These hand-
crafted features include time-domain features [8], frequency-
domain features [9], and time-frequency domain features [10].
In addition, various classifiers are used for sleep stages,
such as support vector machines (SVM) [11], random forests
(RF) [12], and adaptive boosting (AdaBoost) [13]. For
instance, Guo et al. [11] proposed a sleep staging method
using an SVM classifier based on the Hilbert-Huang transform
and sample entropy features. In [14], the authors obtained
the maximized feature based on multi-scale principal com-
ponent analysis and discrete wavelet transform to realize
the classification of sleep stages by integrating the RotSVM
classifier. Based on the time domain and frequency domain,
Timplalexis et al. [15] extracted the mixed features and tested
multiple classifiers to generate the final classifier for sleep
staging with the voting idea. Hassan et al. [16] used the
tunable-Q wavelet transform to extract the features of sleep
EEG signals and implemented a decision support system based
on bootstrap aggregating to complete the classification of
2-state to 6-state sleep stages. In [17], the authors staged sleep
by using several tiny classifiers and employed overlapping
sampling to enhance the quality of the data samples.
Feature selection requires a certain amount of expertise
and has limited performance. Deep learning can automatically
extract meaningful features of polysomnography and further
perform end-to-end sleep stage classification, gaining more
and more interest and attempts. Existing methods can be
categorized by model features into temporal domain feature-
based, spectral domain feature-based, and other spatial feature-
based or multimodal methods. Most of the methods are based
on temporal domain features, and the model input is the raw
temporal EEG sequence. For instance, based on the raw EEG
signals, the convolutional neural network (CNN) was widely
used in discriminative feature extraction to realize sleep stage
classification [18], [19], [20]. To further learn the temporal
correlation information, Supratak et al. 